<h1>Who Done It?</h1>

<strong>Devin Becker</strong> is the Director of the Center for Digital Inquiry and Learning (CDIL) and the Head of Data & Digital Services at the University of Idaho Library, where he directs and maintains the library's digital initiatives program. His library work has been awarded funding from the National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH), the Idaho Humanities Council (IHC), the United States Geological Survey (USGS), and the US Agricultural Information Network (USAIN). His first collection of poetry, Shame | Shame, was selected by David St. John as the winner of the thirteenth annual A. Poulin, Jr. Poetry Prize and was published by BOA Editions LTD in 2015.

<strong>Corey Oglesby</strong> is a poet, musician, and illustrator from the Washington, D.C., area. His work has recently appeared or is forthcoming in Barrow Street, DIAGRAM, Beloit Poetry Journal, Queen Mob’s Teahouse, and elsewhere. Currently the Editor-in-Chief of the literary journal Fugue, he earned his M.F.A. in Poetry at the University of Idaho, where he also helped run the Vandal Poem of the Day web project.

<strong>Lauren Westerfield</strong> is an essayist and poet from the Northern California coast. Her work has appeared or is forthcoming in DIAGRAM, Sonora Review, [PANK], Hobart, The Baltimore Review, Phoebe, Permafrost, Noble/Gas Quarterly, and The Rumpus, where she has also served as an Assistant Essays Editor. Lauren received an MFA in Creative Nonfiction from the University of Idaho, where she was a Centrum Fellow, earned Honorable Mention for the Academy of American Poets Prize, and was nominated for Best New Poets 2018. Current projects include co-coordinating the POP-UP PROSE reading series in Moscow, Idaho, and serving as the Nonfiction Editor of Fugue. 

<h1>Methodology and Collaboration</h1>

The 11 interviews themselves are the product of Devin Becker's 2013-2014 University of Idaho Seed Grant-funded project to interview prominent poets on their writing practices, with questions primarily focused on shifts in each poet’s physical (i.e. drafting) and creative (i.e. research and inspiration) processes in relation to the dawn of personal computing. 

After some time away from the project, Becker dove back in and realized how much data he'd gathered. Rather than synthesize and report on the data in the form of a traditional research paper, Becker decided he'd like to open up the entire project through a large website, tracking both the data and the analyses of that data through visualztions and interactive tools. In May of 2017, Becker brought on University of Idaho MFA students Lauren Westerfield and Corey Oglesby as Center for Digital Inquiry and Learning Summer Research Fellows to help scaffold and develop the project.

Using GitHub as an organizational tool and shared file storage, the team broke the project into various tasks, assigned them to each other, and met frequently over the course of the summer of 2017 to check in on general progress. Building the Ctrl+Shift website from scratch, these tasks included everything from programming various interactive elements to illustrating portraits of the poets interviewed. The majority of the work consisted of cleaning up and breaking out aspects of the interviews themselves, which are available on the site as video, audio, and textual represetnations. 

The team regrouped in May 2018 to begin actual analysis. Becker developed the transcript filtering mechanism, and the team used the various filters he created to take notes and begin writing up their findings. Preliminary analyses are available now via the findings page. The team is, however, also working on two papers to document their findings and the web development/research process for the project in general. 

